Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Crews. And Bill Vernon. Practicing physicist Robert L. Forward is
also a science fiction writer. After writing science fact articles in the
magazines for almost 20 years, Forward recently published his first science
fiction novel, Dragon's Egg. When we asked Forward how he began writing science
fiction, he claimed he was tricked into doing it. But the way I got into
actually writing fiction was Larry Niven tricked me. Here he explains how he
innocently offered to help Larry Niven. Larry Niven and Jerry Pournelle were
running a lecture series at UCLA, invited me to come and give a scientific talk
on gravity as part of their series. It was how science fiction and science
interact. And at the close of one of the sessions that Larry was talking on, he
said he wanted to write a story about beings that lived on a neutron star. Frank
Drake had mentioned this idea a number of years before. He said he really wanted
to write that story. And that night at the cocktail party that they threw, I
said, Larry, I'll tell you what I'll do. I will work up all the scientific
details behind the story because I know a lot about neutron star physics. And it
would be a fun story to read, and I like to read hard science fiction. And what
I'd like to do is give you enough facts so that you can write a really hard
science fiction story without too many errors in it. When Forward finished his
part, Niven was still busy, so Forward continued the work himself. And so I worked
up all the science and gave him about 25, 30 pages of notes. And he said, gee,
I'm busy right now working with Jerry Pournelle on something called Lucifer's
Hammer. And I'm pretty busy. I'll tell you what we'll do. Why don't we just sort
of make this a collaboration? You might write the first draft of the story. And
then I'll take it over from there and rewrite the thing because you're not a
writer, and I am. And that way we'll get the best of both worlds. Well, so I
went back and wrote the first draft. And when I came back, he was still busy.
And so I ended up finding out that I wanted to read this story. And the only way
I could read that story was to write it first. So I had to write it. And so
Larry Niven tricked me into getting into science fiction.
But Larry Niven didn't abandon Forward after tricking him into writing a novel. He
advised Forward on many aspects, including a major plot element. Larry Niven
basically gave the thousand to one, I mean, excuse me, the million to one time
difference.
And the main thing that he brought out was the fact that the important part of
the story was not all the science, which would have been my tendency to write,
but the problems of how do you communicate with somebody that lives and dies a
million times faster than you do.
And if those beings, since they would be thinking a million times faster than
you, would figure out that you were there long before you could figure out they
were there, and they had to figure out a way to communicate with you and signal
you that they were there before you left. And so he mentioned the fact that, for
instance, somebody on the neutron star would have to climb a mountain and send a
signal. And that might take them many generations. Actually, in the story, I
compressed it into one generation, basically. But that was the kind of attitude
that he brought toward the story that helped a lot. More on Robert Forward
tomorrow.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Crews. In our last show, we learned how Robert Forward
was tricked into writing the manuscript, which evolved into his novel, Dragon's
Egg. Larry
Niven helped Forward flesh out his ideas, but it was Lester Del Rey who helped him
polish the manuscript into a novel. My very first draft, of course, was quite
rough from a writing point of view. And when Lester looked at it, he saw some
potential in it, but as it was, as the manuscript was sent to him, it wasn't
acceptable. It wasn't the book. And he sat down and typed up 14 pages, single
-spaced, of detailed criticism of the manuscript. And those 14 pages, when I
followed them to the letter, and I don't think I disagreed with him on but, say,
one or two things, when I went back through the manuscript and took his
suggestions and then looked at the resultant, it was, you know, it began to be
readable instead of being a, well, a science fact article, I guess. It, you
know, it had some flow, it had some characterization, but, you know, it still
was a hard science fiction novel. In Dragon's Egg, Forward takes a hard science
approach to a situation in which beings who inhabit a neutron star learn of the
humans who are orbiting their star, then establish communications with them. The
task is made difficult, though, by the fact that the aliens live at a pace
roughly a million times faster than that of humans. Thus, an individual alien,
or cheela, lives out its entire life in several human minutes. The cheela, being
native to a neutron star, with its intense gravitational and magnetic fields and
extremely dense matter, are certainly constructed different from humans. Here,
Forward tells us about the aliens, their environment, and their names. Once I had
placed my imagination and myself on the surface of the neutron star, now, once I
knew the territory well enough, and appreciated the fact that the light on this
star comes from below, not above, so if the sky is black, there's no light
coming out of it except a few stars, everything is aglow from below, and the
territory is very flat because of the terrific gravity, I began to sort of
appreciate what it was like there. And what I basically did was take the Indian
technique of naming children about things that occurred shortly after they were
born, and applied it to the cheela, but put in a hyphen, so it would take out the
Indian context, and also, of course, a lot of the Indian things like eagles and
feathers and sky and things like that don't exist, so I had to do that transfer.
The cheela's social structure differs from ours as well, though there are some
similarities. Soon I began to realize that in my dreaming up of these creatures,
I'd end up with a social structure that was sort of halfway between a Scottish
clan and an Indian tribe, and as if both the Indians and the Scottish were
crocodiles that laid eggs instead of having the problems of mammals that they
have to take care of their young. The young are immediately viable in crocodiles
and turtles, and so are the little tiny cheela. So what I tried to do was imagine
what it would be like if, instead of monkeys developing intelligent social
interactions, crocodiles developed intelligent social interactions.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Crews. And Bill Vernon. Although science fiction is a literature
ostensibly about science, the effects of technology, or a future where science
is very much present, or in some cases very much absent, it is mainly written by
non-scientists. Some writers do have undergraduate degrees in the sciences. Poul
Anderson, Arthur C. Clarke, Joe Haldeman, and Charles Harness, to name a few.
And certainly most other writers have had some coursework in the sciences. But
there are a few scientists who write science fiction. Practicing scientists who
write it include Gregory Benford, Joan Slonczewski, Fred Hoyle, David Brin, and
Tony Rothman, and a notable ex-scientist, Isaac Asimov. Another practicing
scientist who writes science fiction is physicist Robert Forward, whose novel
Dragon's Egg we have discussed previously. We asked Forward what enjoyment he
reaps from being a scientist and writing science fiction. Writing is a process
of selling science. I mean, I have always felt that part of my job as a
scientist was to try and communicate, first, the facts of science, and second,
the excitement of science, science, to the general public that is not involved
in science. Because science is at the cutting edge of our intellectual
achievements, whether it's physical sciences, chemical sciences, biological or
social or whatever sciences. This is where we're developing as an intelligent
being. And we're learning more about the world around us and how we operate in
that world. And it's very exciting to be involved in that. And you don't get
many scientists admitting that it's exciting, but it is. I mean, that's part of
the reasons you get professors working at wages less than they would if they
were a plumber, is it's more fun to be a scientist. But most of them are so
hidebound and so concerned about their image that they don't want to admit that
they're having fun. Well, I admit I'm having fun being a scientist. And I think
it's fun. I think that fun and the excitement and everything else can be
communicated to the general public so that their awareness of the fact that
they're part of an intellectual and evolutionary advance as an intelligent being
can be given to them. And I think that's one of the reasons why we have such a
spurt of magazines today like Omni and Science 80 and the Smithsonian and others
that have, and Discovery. All of these magazines are beginning to realize that
people want to be part of the leading edge of our cultural evolution. And I
found that I have the ability to communicate that. Now, for many years, I would
only write science articles, not fiction. I wouldn't have a story. I'd just say,
here's something interesting I found at the outskirts of science, and isn't it
wonderful and isn't it great? And I'd write it down to whatever level was there.
And those were science speculation articles that I've sold in Analog and Omni
and places like that. And I'm finding that doing it in the form of fiction
reaches more people.
Although Forward is becoming better known in the science fiction community because
of Dragon's Egg, he has been in the field for many years writing science fact
articles for the science fiction magazines. Certainly, science fiction benefits
when people with not only the scientific background, but the enthusiasm of
Robert Forward contribute to it.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Carson. One of the most unique of all science
fiction novels is Norman Spinrad's The Iron Dream. Though Spinrad did indeed
write the book, he presents it as if it were written by Adolf Hitler. Spinrad
bases the book on a provocative supposition. Suppose Hitler, instead of leading
the Nazi party to power in Germany, had come to this country and become a
science fiction writer. What kind of books would he have written? The Iron Dream
is Spinrad's answer to that question. He wrote the book exactly as he believes
Hitler would have. Spinrad says it was a difficult book to write. Because in
order to write that book, I had to write like Hitler. And in order to get to
that point, I had to read everything that Hitler had written, which is very
boring indeed. And I had to also write a book called Hitler's Dinner
Conversations. It was like 800 pages of Hitler's babblings at the dinner table,
which was taken down to short end by Martin Bormann, a fascinating book. But in
order to write the bulk of that book, Hitler's novel, inside the book, I had to
write like Hitler. I had to get inside Hitler's head. But that was not what I
could consider a fun experience. And so it was a very difficult book to write,
and kind of a shattering book to write because of the kind of position I put
myself in. Also, of course, Hitler was a terrible writer. So in order to be
accurate, I really had to write something awful, in a way. And I was trying to,
you know, also Hitler was getting crazier and crazier as he was writing the
book. So I got crazier and crazier as I was writing the book.
Hitler's main character is Feric Jagger, a sword and sorcery type hero. Jagger
fights to preserve the racial purity of humanity against hordes of genetically
inferior mutants. And in every way, Spinrad tries to create a novel a pulp
science fiction writer with Hitler's political and racial views and writing
skills would have produced. The book, of course, is a classic anti-fascist
novel. We asked Spinrad if anyone had ever completely misunderstood it and
thought he was admiring Hitler. No, the only kind of misunderstanding that I
read in a review that I really got was a little bit different. It was somebody
who said, well, this is really all good fun, you know, I really enjoyed this
book. Why did he have to muck it up with all this stuff about Hitler and all the
extraneous paraphernalia? It was just a good, you know, rousing adventure tale.
That is the only kind of misreading of the book that's really taken place.
Actually, I have not been called a Nazi or a fascist by anyone that I know of in
connection with that book.
Spinrad explains where the idea for such a unique experiment came from. Well,
the impetus came from a conversation with Martin Wilcock in London where I was
living at the time about how he wrote Sword and Sorcery and how he used Freudian
imagery and, you know, the basic appeal of sword and sorcery. And that gave me
the idea that if Hitler had not, you know, become Fuhrer of Germany, he could
have as well winded up writing Sword and Sorcery. And I've always been, you
know, fascinated with the whole question of how a thing like Nazism could really
happen. And none of the stuff I had read about that really satisfied me, you
know, political or economic or conventional explanations of how this happened.
And the two things came together. And, you know, my insight about Nazism was
that it was a psychosexual phenomenon that Hitler came to power by, in effect,
manipulating imagery
and psychosexual substructures rather than by a coherent economic program and so
forth. And so that was a basic... And then, you know, this had a certain
correlation with a certain kind of sword and sorcery, and that was the basic
impetus that generated the book. The Iron Dream was published in 1972. It won
the pre-Apollo Award in France and was recently reissued in this country by
Timescape Books. And when it was first published in Germany, not too long ago,
it was banned. We'll have that story next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson. And Daryl Lane. Early in 1982, Norman Spinrad's science
fiction novel, The Iron Dream, was totally banned in Germany. As we explained
last time, the book is an anti-fascist novel. Though Spinrad pretends the book
was written by Adolf Hitler, it is actually a brilliant criticism of the
political and racial views held by Hitler. Spinrad says the book has been well
-received in all the countries where it's been published. This book has been
published now in the United States, Britain, France, Japan, Spain, Portugal,
Argentina, Italy, I forget where else, about eight different countries. It's
been published in the other two, Axis Powers. It's been published in Argentina.
And it's been extensively reviewed in about eight different countries. There's
no, I have no instance where the book was misunderstood and was taken as
anything but an anti-Nazi and anti-fascist novel.
Throughout the world. The German censors cited the book's danger to young people
as one reason it was banned. We asked Spinrad if anyone could possibly
misunderstand his intentions in The Iron Dream. Well, Annie, I mean, you know,
you know, you know, you know, you know, Hinkley certainly misunderstood saying
taxi drivers. So there's always schizophrenics and maniacs around who can
misunderstand anything. I mean, David Horowitz heard demons in his head. I mean,
there are always completely crazy people who can read things out of something
that were never in there. So I'd be one or two people around, you know, you
know, psychotics who could get anything out of any book. But I don't, I, see,
the book is written on two levels. The sophisticated readers, they understand
what it is to begin with. The other level is that the kind of people who are
into things like Perry Rhodan and that kind of proto-fascist science fantasy, we
start off reading the book, maybe identifying with Feric Jagger, you know, a
third of the way into it or something, and then suddenly realizing what it is
they're identifying with. And so it becomes a kind of deprogramming experience
for the kind of people that they claim would be harmed. I think it would be a
very strongly anti-Nazi book precisely for those kinds of young people who might
have leanings in that direction because they would then be confronted with what
it is that they're really identifying with. We also asked Spinrad what his
reaction to the ban was. My reaction to the ban is very complicated. First of
all, it took ten years to get this book published in Germany. All my French
friends said it would never be published in Germany. So when Heyne Verlag, you
know, summoned up the courage to publish it, I was very pleased, and I thought
that this was going to, you know, that this represented a kind of maturity on
the part of Germany, that they're willing to look at this stuff. And I felt very
good about it being published there, and I was a bit surprised. Now that it's
banned, obviously I feel that, well, the book says it all. The book itself, in a
way, is about why it was banned, because it's the same sort of mentality that
goes around banning books that resulted in a different kind of way in the Third
Reich. That's not to say that all Germans are like this, because the publisher
has fought this all the way and is continuing to find it. Most of the German
newspapers, there's been a lot of coverage, has supported the book against the
ban. The German chapter of World SF had a vote and issued a public statement
against the ban in supporting the book.
So, you know, I think it's a very retrogressive thing, and it says something
about, I suppose, the German political and social system, is that they do not
understand the concept that is embodied in the First Amendment to the
Constitution of the United States. And it's a particularly pernicious law,
because anything can be banned under this law under the grounds that it's not
fit for children, even if it's not intended for children, which is exactly the
kind of thing that the moral majority is trying to do here, which tells you what
kind of people they are, too.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.